docs/SIM_EVAL_SPEC.md, before:

# Simulation & Evaluation Spec (v1)

Goal: make simulation runs reproducible, comparable, and CI-friendly.
Rule: no “results” claims unless they are produced by a committed scenario + seed + commit hash.

---

## 1) Scenario Contract (inputs)

A scenario is a versioned spec that fully defines a run:
- scenario_id (string)
- scenario_version (integer)  # start at 1
- engine (enum): { rl_sim_env | core_sim | replay_stub }
- horizon:
  - steps (int) OR duration_seconds (float)
  - dt_seconds (float)
- rng:
  - base_seed (u64)
  - num_seeds (int)  # runner expands base_seed + k
- initial_state:
  - risk_profile (string)  # uses existing PARAPHINA_RISK_PROFILE values
  - init_q_tao (float)
- market_model:
  - type: { synthetic | historical_stub }
  - synthetic (if synthetic):
      - process: { gbm | jump_diffusion_stub }
      - params: (vol, drift, jump_intensity, jump_size, etc)
  - historical_stub:
      - dataset_id (string)  # no data in repo; pointer only
- microstructure_model (v1 minimal):
  - fees_bps_maker (float)
  - fees_bps_taker (float)
  - latency_ms (float)  # constant in v1
- invariants (assertions):
  - expect_kill_switch: { always | never | allowed }
  - pnl_linearity_check: { enabled | disabled }  # for q0 sweeps, if applicable

---

## 2) Output Schema (artifacts)

### Single Scenario Runs

For `sim_eval run`, outputs go to:

```
runs/<scenario_id>/<timestamp_or_commit>/<seed_k>/
```

### Suite Runs

For `sim_eval suite`, output isolation is institutional-grade:

- **With `--output-dir`**: All artifacts go exactly to the specified directory
- **Without `--output-dir`**: A unique directory is auto-generated:
  ```
  runs/suites/<suite_id>/<timestamp>/
  ```

The **suite output root** contains:

```
runs/suites/<suite_id>/<timestamp>/
├── evidence_pack/           # Root evidence pack for the entire suite
│   ├── manifest.json
│   ├── suite.yaml
│   └── SHA256SUMS
├── <scenario_1>/            # Per-scenario outputs
│   ├── run_summary.json
│   ├── config_resolved.json
│   ├── build_info.json
│   └── evidence_pack/       # Per-scenario evidence pack
└── <scenario_N>/
    └── ...
```

### Suite `--output-dir` Option

The `sim_eval suite` command supports an explicit `--output-dir` option:

```bash
# Run suite with explicit output directory
sim_eval suite suites/ci_smoke.yaml --output-dir ./my_run

# All artifacts go under ./my_run/
# Evidence pack is at ./my_run/evidence_pack/
```

When `--output-dir` is specified:
- All suite artifacts are written exactly to that directory
- Evidence pack is written to `<output-dir>/evidence_pack/`

To verify the outputs:

```bash
# Verify all evidence packs (root + per-scenario)
sim_eval verify-evidence-tree <output-dir>

# Verify only the root evidence pack
sim_eval verify-evidence-pack <output-dir>
```

### Required files per run

- run_summary.json  # small, stable; CI compares this
- metrics.jsonl     # optional streaming metrics (tick or periodic)
- config_resolved.json  # fully resolved scenario + defaults applied
- build_info.json   # git sha, dirty flag, rustc/cargo version

Minimum required fields in run_summary.json:
- scenario_id, scenario_version
- seed
- risk_profile, init_q_tao
- steps, dt_seconds
- pnl:
  - final_pnl_usd
  - max_drawdown_usd
- kill_switch:
  - triggered (bool)
  - step (int|null)
  - reason (string|null)
- determinism:
  - checksum (string)  # hash of key time series or summary payload

---

## 3) Evaluation Protocol (how changes are judged)

We maintain:
- A “CI smoke suite” scenario set (small, fast).
- A “research suite” scenario set (larger, used locally/overnight).

CI gates (v1):
- Determinism: identical `(scenario_id, seed)` => identical `run_summary.json` checksum.
- Schema completeness: required output fields always present.
- No regression in invariants:
  - if scenario says expect_kill_switch=never, kill-switch must not trigger.
  - if pnl_linearity_check enabled, it must pass within tolerance.

---

## 4) Calibration Targets (documented, not enforced in v1)

For synthetic processes:
- return mean ~ 0 (unless specified)
- realized vol matches requested target within tolerance
- jump frequency ~ intensity target (if jump model used)

For microstructure:
- fee sign flip should change performance directionally (maker rebates vs costs)
- no NaNs; no negative inventories if bounded

---

## 5) Ablation Harness (v1 registry)

Ablations are named switches the runner can apply:
- disable_toxicity_gate
- disable_fair_value_gate
- disable_vol_floor
- disable_risk_regime
- disable_exit_engine (should be forbidden in CI unless explicitly allowed)

Each ablation must be:
- explicit
- logged into config_resolved.json
- reflected in run_summary.json

---

## 6) Versioning

- scenario_version increments when schema changes
- output schema version increments when required fields change
- backwards compatibility policy:
  - v1 runner must be able to load scenario_version=1
  - breaking changes require new scenario_version

Commit message:

whitepaper: formalize evidence pack + sim_eval specification

docs/SIM_EVAL_SPEC.md, after:

# Simulation & Evaluation Spec (v1)

Goal: make simulation runs reproducible, comparable, and CI-friendly.
Rule: no "results" claims unless they are produced by a committed scenario + seed + commit hash.

> **See also:**
> - [EVIDENCE_PACK.md](EVIDENCE_PACK.md) — Evidence Pack v1 schema and verification
> - [WHITEPAPER.md § Auditability and Reproducibility](WHITEPAPER.md#auditability-and-reproducibility) — operator runbook and CI gate requirements

---

## 1) Scenario Contract (inputs)

A scenario is a versioned spec that fully defines a run:
- scenario_id (string)
- scenario_version (integer)  # start at 1
- engine (enum): { rl_sim_env | core_sim | replay_stub }
- horizon:
  - steps (int) OR duration_seconds (float)
  - dt_seconds (float)
- rng:
  - base_seed (u64)
  - num_seeds (int)  # runner expands base_seed + k
- initial_state:
  - risk_profile (string)  # uses existing PARAPHINA_RISK_PROFILE values
  - init_q_tao (float)
- market_model:
  - type: { synthetic | historical_stub }
  - synthetic (if synthetic):
      - process: { gbm | jump_diffusion_stub }
      - params: (vol, drift, jump_intensity, jump_size, etc)
  - historical_stub:
      - dataset_id (string)  # no data in repo; pointer only
- microstructure_model (v1 minimal):
  - fees_bps_maker (float)
  - fees_bps_taker (float)
  - latency_ms (float)  # constant in v1
- invariants (assertions):
  - expect_kill_switch: { always | never | allowed }
  - pnl_linearity_check: { enabled | disabled }  # for q0 sweeps, if applicable

---

## 2) Output Schema (artifacts)

### Single Scenario Runs

For `sim_eval run`, outputs go to:

```
runs/<scenario_id>/<timestamp_or_commit>/<seed_k>/
```

### Suite Runs

For `sim_eval suite`, output isolation is institutional-grade:

- **With `--output-dir`**: All artifacts go exactly to the specified directory
- **Without `--output-dir`**: A unique directory is auto-generated:
  ```
  runs/suites/<suite_id>/<timestamp>/
  ```

The **suite output root** contains:

```
runs/suites/<suite_id>/<timestamp>/
├── evidence_pack/           # Root evidence pack for the entire suite
│   ├── manifest.json
│   ├── suite.yaml
│   └── SHA256SUMS
├── <scenario_1>/            # Per-scenario outputs
│   ├── run_summary.json
│   ├── config_resolved.json
│   ├── build_info.json
│   └── evidence_pack/       # Per-scenario evidence pack
└── <scenario_N>/
    └── ...
```

### Suite `--output-dir` Option

The `sim_eval suite` command supports an explicit `--output-dir` option:

```bash
# Run suite with explicit output directory
sim_eval suite suites/ci_smoke.yaml --output-dir ./my_run

# All artifacts go under ./my_run/
# Evidence pack is at ./my_run/evidence_pack/
```

When `--output-dir` is specified:
- All suite artifacts are written exactly to that directory
- Evidence pack is written to `<output-dir>/evidence_pack/`

To verify the outputs:

```bash
# Verify all evidence packs (root + per-scenario)
sim_eval verify-evidence-tree <output-dir>

# Verify only the root evidence pack
sim_eval verify-evidence-pack <output-dir>
```

### Required files per run

- run_summary.json  # small, stable; CI compares this
- metrics.jsonl     # optional streaming metrics (tick or periodic)
- config_resolved.json  # fully resolved scenario + defaults applied
- build_info.json   # git sha, dirty flag, rustc/cargo version

Minimum required fields in run_summary.json:
- scenario_id, scenario_version
- seed
- risk_profile, init_q_tao
- steps, dt_seconds
- pnl:
  - final_pnl_usd
  - max_drawdown_usd
- kill_switch:
  - triggered (bool)
  - step (int|null)
  - reason (string|null)
- determinism:
  - checksum (string)  # hash of key time series or summary payload

---

## 3) Evaluation Protocol (how changes are judged)

We maintain:
- A “CI smoke suite” scenario set (small, fast).
- A “research suite” scenario set (larger, used locally/overnight).

CI gates (v1):
- Determinism: identical `(scenario_id, seed)` => identical `run_summary.json` checksum.
- Schema completeness: required output fields always present.
- No regression in invariants:
  - if scenario says expect_kill_switch=never, kill-switch must not trigger.
  - if pnl_linearity_check enabled, it must pass within tolerance.

---

## 4) Calibration Targets (documented, not enforced in v1)

For synthetic processes:
- return mean ~ 0 (unless specified)
- realized vol matches requested target within tolerance
- jump frequency ~ intensity target (if jump model used)

For microstructure:
- fee sign flip should change performance directionally (maker rebates vs costs)
- no NaNs; no negative inventories if bounded

---

## 5) Ablation Harness (v1 registry)

Ablations are named switches the runner can apply:
- disable_toxicity_gate
- disable_fair_value_gate
- disable_vol_floor
- disable_risk_regime
- disable_exit_engine (should be forbidden in CI unless explicitly allowed)

Each ablation must be:
- explicit
- logged into config_resolved.json
- reflected in run_summary.json

---

## 6) Versioning

- scenario_version increments when schema changes
- output schema version increments when required fields change
- backwards compatibility policy:
  - v1 runner must be able to load scenario_version=1
  - breaking changes require new scenario_version
